Right. Are we there?
I see the webinar is live streaming. Must be. All right, Mr.
Heslet, five minutes with you. Thank you.
In my
profes-
Sorry. There's a lot of feedback.
Can we just It's
better off putting...
Is that working now?
Mm-hmm.
Okay, cool.
In my professional opinion, this legislation is
premature.
As background, I'm Emeritus Professor of Statistics at Massey
University. I've been Professor of Statistics at the
Australian National University.
I've been a professorial fellow
in the National Institute of Advanced Research and Statistics at the
University of Wollongong.
I've worked internationally,
principally for the United Nations over the last twenty-five years.
If you look at my submission, I've listed
two dozen countries I've worked in.
I've worked in government statistics departments in these places or with them.
So my experience is principally around the
methodology.
And
although
you have a bill in front of you, the bill actually is
going to be very difficult to bring to fruition in terms of
what it's going to produce because the methodology is underdeveloped.
My strong recommendation
is
that you set up an expert committee,
including international methodologists, and not
like the Stats NZ committee, which they set up, which
contained no methodologist.
It contained a statistician without any experience in official statistics.
So what they produced is useful but
inadequate for purpose.
So Stats NZ have plans,
and their plans are partly outlined in a document
they produced
called, "Creating Household and Family Information from Administrative Data:
Progress, Limitations, and the Next Census,"
March 2026.
In it, among other things, they mention
that in terms of being able to match the 2023
census with the type of administrative data that is
available to them at present,
they are only able to match households
exactly for 50% of the population, half the
population. In other words, half the households are not
correct.
And your planning, or I don't know whether it's you, the plan is to move
down this path and produce data which is clearly not
equivalent to a census.
New Zealand, if it moves in this direction, is completely alone.
There is no country internationally that's doing this.
There is moves to use administrative data, but the idea of using administrative
data as a primary source is not used
anywhere.
So brave or foolish, you'll have to decide,
but I suggest that you're moving, and this bill is moving
prematurely towards something that has been talked about for
20 years internationally and abandoned in a number of countries.
Egg on the face is the risk.
The cost of the census previously, the last two censuses, both government
statisticians involved
resigned.
They were not statisticians.
They were government appointees or
public service appointees
without the necessary skills to do the job.
They probably didn't listen either,
and so the cost overruns in 2023 are a result of an appointment,
and they are the result of not listening to some of the expert advice that is
in Stats NZ.
So Professor,
I would like to
ask you a question.
Yeah, sure.
So
your contention is that the
methodology's flawed.
When you talk about going to a reference group and
doing all that sort of stuff and basically delaying it, but
with all your experience,
do you think the methodology can be made to work that there's a
much higher confidence level rather than 50%, but maybe 90% or
whatever? How
would you go about improving the methodology, or are you just
generally opposed to the administration-style new approach of using
administration data?
I'm not opposed to using administrative data.
The current IDI, Integrated Data-
Yeah
... System-
... has as its backbone the census,
a field-based census, and if you take it out, Stats NZ,
when you take it out, they'll call what's left a spine.
But the spine is not what I would call a backbone.
I know it's choice of words.
Yeah.
I had to choose another.
I get that. It's fine.
But it's not a backbone because it doesn't contain the rich information that a
census contains. It's information from different
databases at different dates. I know you've got a counting date,
but it's a legal fiction in many ways because the
data comes from-
Yeah. So you-
... different databases with different ages, with different quality of information.
Okay. So if I infer from what you answer there,
and I'm not trying to be contentious.
No.
I'm just asking.
Yeah.
You're saying without a census to create the backbone,
um... you're
going to have, we're going to have trouble getting reliable data.
My point is,
could you see a way of using admin data
to create a backbone
through better methodology? That's my real point.
No other country has succeeded yet.
I think it needs more work, and I think that's why I think you need to be
aware of the steps that if you're moving in that direction, the steps you're
taking.
Okay. We've got Mr. Stevenson next.
Thanks, Professor. I'm only kidding.
Yeah.
Thanks for your submission.
A quick question. Yeah, obviously this administrative data is available today.
Have you done or are you aware of any work where it's compared
the administrative data available today via Stats New Zealand and,
say, the last census-
Yes
... or the census before that, and what the-
Yeah
... the variate or, yeah.
So that-
How much that aligns? Yeah
So that was why I mentioned this report from Stats New Zealand, this creating
household and family information through administrative data, and why
I mentioned that to match the families exactly, they've succeeded only
with 50% of households.
Now, one of the consequences of this for the electoral thing is that there's a lot
of mismatch. There are households which appear in the administrative data that
don't appear in the census, and vice versa.
This means that actually counting people is going to be extremely difficult.
Counting people accurately is going to be difficult.
Setting electoral boundaries is going to be very tough.
And for those of you who are in parliament, you're not going to get,
although this is peripheral, I suppose, you're not going to get detailed
information about your electorate anymore.
You may get some general information about it, but if you're interested in
subgroups within the electorate, I'm sorry,
not there.
Yeah. Okay, I've got Madam Bennett.
Yeah, sure.
Just in terms of the alternative.
Yeah.
We've heard that the current census, as it is set up at the moment,
maintaining that moving forward is not sustainable.
Is that a view that you share, or do you believe
that there would be a way to continue the current model,
as opposed to using this administrative data?
If you want my professional advice, you'd be ill-advised to do anything other than
a field-based census next time round.
It would create the time to start thinking through what it is
that's needed if you're going to move to a system that's a little more like this.
But there is no country in the world that doesn't either do a field-based
census or
have a register, as they have in Scandinavian countries.
We have no register. Stats New Zealand will claim they have a spine,
which is made up of not a register, but a sort of
collection of administrative data sources that have got different IDs and
different types of information which are mysteriously put together to produce
one animal, despite the fact they're really the backbones of three different cats.
By register you mean
some kind of list of every person-
Yeah
... who's currently in the country.
Absolutely. Absolutely, and that's what Scandinavia do.
The Scandinavian countries do. And they don't run a
field-based census because they can use that as a backbone or a spine
to put the information from the surveys on.
In New Zealand, we're going to do a survey which is actually not as big as you
think it is. It's going to struggle to give reasonable information for
small groups,
and
it's not going to have
that information either from a register or a field-based census.
Yeah. I take the point that it won't have
a lot of detail, but it's incorrect to say,
isn't it, Professor, that they're not going to do field surveys, they're just going
to do smaller tailored surveys.
Yes, I know, but that's a survey and not a census.
It's at most 5% of the population. What about the other
95%? It can be used to calculate estimates with a
given accuracy for large subgroups, but it's not going to give you
detailed information. Certainly not for individuals-
Yeah
... certainly not for groups, for example, within electorates.
So we just-
It's just not going to be possible anymore.
Right. Yeah, and I take that point, that it's going to be not as much data.
But if you're doing a 60,000
person survey type stuff,
the confidence level, what's your
deviation on things like that? Are you saying that
can
that be seen as representative of
the broader data around-
Yeah
...
how many people are in the country, for instance, or what nationality are they,
what ethnicity they are?
I think I'll stay away from ethnicity for the moment.
That's a whole-
Yeah
... half hour.
Except to say that different databases record ethnicity differently, and when
you're trying to amalgamate them, there's open questions about how you might do
that. You say 60,000 people,
and in fact, Stats New Zealand will say over the course of five years they might
have 250,000.
Yeah.
So the first question I'd have for you is, what period does this apply for?
What year does this apply for if you're putting five years' data together?
It's certainly not a counting day.
And the other part of this is that people want information for subgroups,
and I'll stay with electorates. Let's say, very roughly,
120 electorates. You divide 120
into the-
I don't know
... 250,000.
Yeah.
You now got 2,000 people over the course of five years.
That's 400 a year. You don't get very good accuracy from 400 a
year, even at electorate level. When you look at subgroups, you'll find
you're in trouble.
Okay.
All right. Hayden, well, thank you for your submission.
It's been
an interesting start to public submissions on this.
Yeah.
But thank you for coming.
Yeah. Thank you. I think I may be unusual in that most of the people, apart from
Stats New Zealand, who turn up
I won't have any sociological comment.
Yeah. Cool. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you. Now, we're going to Craig.
He is online.
All right.
Mr. Atkinson, are you with us?
Yeah.
He's late.
Cool.
Connection.
Yeah.
Craig, are you there?
Wait for him.
He'll appear.
All right. Here we go.
Yeah.
Hey.
Good morning. Still morning. We've got five minutes with you.
Yeah. Just wanting the clarification.
It's about the electorate boundaries isn't it?
The statistics ones next week.
Yeah. We've got different timings.
We've got stuff next week and the following week. Yep.
Oh, yeah. Just because the first one just sounded more about the statistics than
the electorate boundaries.
That's all. Just confirming that. Yeah.
So yeah, for the electorate boundaries and the altering of
what the... I think it's a play straight out of Margaret
Thatcher's playbook,
where basically they
would remove areas that they'd know votes one way
to a different area just to tip the numbers and set the pack of
cards before the election goes.
Yeah. I'm very questionable about when it sat in front of a
Justice Select Committee when you're going to say you've all got a conflict of
interest and that, it comes across more, and I'd
put the word in front of the Justice Select Committee, all dodgy.
And
so we could rename you the Dodgy
Justice Select Committee, because it don't come across when you're wanting to alter
boundaries where boundaries are fixed and they stay, when you're only
doing it for an election thing. And how it refers to with the
statistics, the information that we collect then through algorithms
then gives you a better percentage of where people are going to vote.
So
yeah. I think it's an election cycle,
isn't it? So that's my submission.
All right. Thank you for that. What I would say to you is that
under previous elections, and
there is a standard approach where there's an
electoral commission that looks at the
boundaries, and that's assessed every time prior to the election.
We have no role in that.
There's no
change to that situation. And as MPs, we are not involved in that
personally.
Oh.
So that's an outside appointments for that process.
So that doesn't change under this bill, but that's a different point.
Anyone else got any questions for Mr. Atkinson?
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning.
Cool.
You look like you're in a sunny place.
Thank you.
Sounds great.
It might, yeah.
Looks good. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Right. Now,
we have
Eva who hadn't-
No, Jasmine.
Right. Jasmine Richardson, are you available?
She's waiting.
Oh, yeah, of course.
And Max Marshall,
you could come up and do some preparation, if you don't mind.
Jasmine, are you with us?
Sorry.
Just wait there. Yeah, just sit there. Just sit there.
Ready, just in preparation.
Poised.
Poised. Yeah.
Jasmine, are you there with us?
All right, cool.
Good morning. How are you? Your mute is on.
Unmute?
All right. We can hear you.
Okay.
Thank you.
Now we've got five minutes with you, so looking forward to hearing what you've got
to say.
Oh, yes. Thank you. I just wanted to,
I guess, probably reiterate what other people have already said.
I'm worried about people who go out
and are not enrolled but want to go and vote on the
day or a few days before, and won't be able to if
these changes take effect. I'm worried about that being a lot of young
people, Maori, Pacifica.
I guess people who I feel that I can relate to and
believe I would want to know who they would want to...
Well, I wouldn't want to know, but I would want them to have had their say and tick
their box about, I guess, the people who will lead our country.
And yes, that's it.
Hey, thank
you, Jasmine. Unfortunately, I think that what you're relating, what
you're talking about there is not under the electoral boundary, but actually under
the-
Electoral Memora-
... Electoral Memora. But it's under the other bill that we're looking at,
and that we've considered.
Yeah. That's for this committee.
But
thank you for those comments. Anyone else got any
questions for Jasmine?
Mm.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for a very succinct presentation. But that's good.
Good to hear, and I think everyone recognizes the need for
democracy to work and practice and then action. So thank you for those comments.
Yeah.
Right. Now, Mr. Marshall-
Yes
... you're here with us?
Yes. Yes.
Yeah. Hi. Thank you everyone. Thank you
for giving me the opportunity to speak.
I want to talk about the Electoral Bill.
I take it my submission is read,
my written submission.
There is an underlying malaise of our political system
that, in the drawing up of electoral boundaries, not only
accentuates but also entrenches.
The electorate boundaries demarcate
go-Demarcation along lines of economic and political
disparity between the main centers and regions
concentrate more political and economic contribution
or power in the core
centers at the expense of the regions.
There has been a gap between the urban centers and regions
described by theorists as the core and
periphery.
But not just
disparity in resources, but also political
power.
This becomes even more pronounced at national level,
and even more so in political contexts.
In this disparity between urban and regional, how well we
prosper or even whether our existence in the future may depend on our
ability to better integrate the two parts together
so that not one party is comparatively worse
off.
The framework of the unitary state exists in form in New
Zealand, and where necessary
expedient. But in practical terms and under normal conditions, it does
not operate towards reconciling the two halves.
Underlying many issues of race, gender, and class, there is
one common denominator, and it is this dynamic
of this stratification.
Insecurity for oneself or one's individual group in
any of these categories, if analyzed deeply, has this conflict
as its key driver.
Peter Spurney credits the loss at the last
election in part as being the inability of the last government to
recognize the needs of the regions, much less listen to them.
Take the unaffordable cost of flight travel for regions.
No viable solution has been offered, at least from the
states. Much more though,
this threatens to degrade
our tradition of liberal democracy.
It comes as no surprise that in the last decades,
governments and their officials have been hostile to public planning in terms of
some national interest.
This exchange of resources becomes political.
Urban dwellers may require access to resources
from a local region. For the regional dweller, he
faces other challenges in form of increased costs
associated with maintaining the system for the
resources and will seek support from the government, who is by
proxy the urban dweller.
The next point is secondary, but still important.
How important is it that any system does not perpetuate
itself by being mapped onto existing patterns
of existing stratifications of
socioeconomic spatial inequality?
Both major parties have a political character which favors
interests of different groups. This political
tribalism is at the expense of any view of attempted
national interest or common good, and it leaves us divided
and fragmented at best.
The drawing up of any new election must be drawn up along
lines of political neutrality which divert from following the demographic
outlines in which these interests could be captured within the populations
inside their boundaries. I fear without more
flexibility to apply a more proportionate system
through the design of boundaries,
without such measures will lead to further loss of trust between the
two sides as its upshot.
Right. Thank you very much. I've got a question from Mr Rosewarne.
Thanks, Max. You opened up your contribution to urban regional
gap, and I was just wondering what safeguards do you think
are necessary to ensure that changes to boundary setting rules
cannot be used to advantage the government of the day?
It's a really difficult one, and I think it's
a perennial question.
How do you
manage the problem of majoritarianism where you have
voting
on most of your centers, most of your population is going to be in the main
centers, and it's been that way since, I think, 1960s there
was that shift, or
1940, just before the Second
World War. So this is a problem that we're going to have to struggle with.
But it's a challenge,
reconciling
this problem.
But that's sort of part of what democracy is.
It's this process.
All right. Hey, thank you for a very thoughtful presentation.
Okay.
It's a conundrum, isn't it? Because
where people seek to live and choose to live, I should say,
you have natural concentrations, which mean economic
power and all those other things. But
trying to devise something that is fair,
because there's two sides to that debate you're putting forward.
But thank you for that thoughtful presentation.
Right. Kay Jones, you're there, I see.
Thank you.
Yeah, we've got five minutes with you as well.
Just swap into a better chair.
Kia ora, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appearOh, Kay
Jones, .
I'm a fifth-generation Pakeha New Zealander with Scottish, Shetland,
and English heritage, and with Maori whanau.
I understand you've read my submission.
It was very short because I focused more on the data and statistics one,
and since that time, I've been considering other points.
Usually, when I present before you, I talk of my own experience.
And I could talk about working on the local government commission and going to
areas and listening to people presenting on why the boundaries
of their areas should be changed or not for voting purposes.
But today, I would prefer to
quote other people, friends, friends of friends, and from
documents that you should have read.
You'll remember the recent apologies that the government gave to survivors of
abuse in state care.
Survivors describe their feelings thus: "We have been
disconnected from our being, like a stranger in our country,
alienated from family and heritage, born into a world innocent and
free, oblivious to systemic behavior which has denied and
exhausted and extinguished our flame of hope."
In his apology, Prime Minister Luxon said, "Many of
you were denied knowledge of what happened to you because record keeping
during your time in care was so poor or
deliberately inaccurate.
Your own personal information was often withheld,
destroyed, lost, or wrong or incomplete.
Often, there was no record of your ethnic origins, your family and
whanau, the harm you experienced, the complaints you made, your
medical treatments, or what social workers said about you."
Labor leader Chris Hipkins said, "Maori survivors
themselves found themselves in a system that inherently worked against
them and in care settings that were blatantly racist, suffering
severe abuse.
Many Maori survivors were made to feel whakam, shame at having
been stripped of their identity as Maori.
Whakapapa and mana motuhake were transgressed and people were
severed from their whanau."
And when we go on to look at, for example,
the NGOs that were advising
survivors on
appearing and putting their testimony, they recorded-
Okay, Kay. We're talking about the electoral boundaries-
Precisely. Record keeping not being consistent.
When we're talking about
a system of recognizing for the purposes
of defining electoral votes, somebody being on the Maori
roll, they first must know that they are Maori.
They must be able to prove it. They must be able to go onto that roll.
I have heard from rangatahi of their korou who was uplisted as a
child and who has no factual basis
for being on the Maori roll. They are visibly Maori in terms of
how we perceive that, but they do not have that
accurate data. Now, in a census, they can
self-identify. But when it comes to administrative data,
they are erased. Now, this is part of a process
of disenfranchisement. If people have
difficulty getting onto a roll, then that takes away
their right to vote in that area. If there is
already a large population of Maori that would be enough to
justify an eighth electoral seat, and you are
by postponing that for another five or more
years, you are also reducing-- You're saying these
votes have less value than those of people on the
general roll. So it is a push
for rangatahi registering for the first time or people considering,
I've never voted before and I'm in my 50s, but maybe I will this time.
When they make that choice of whether to be on the general roll or the Maori roll,
knowing that their vote is actually going to be counted more if they're
on the general roll may make a difference, or it
may make them so
disillusioned, angered, whatever.
The emotional import of being seen as less and being
excluded. So my reasons for referring back to the
survivors in state care system is because it was not just
abuse of people's physical and emotional
wellbeing. It was also an attack on their whakapapa, their connections to
their identity and their ability to prove that.
And this bill does the same thing through
the process that has been imposed to say, "We will
count less. We will defer. We will delay.
We will not count people." I'll stop there in case there's any questions.
Yes, I've got a question from Mr. Broth.
Thank you, and thank you, Kay. Point six of your submission says the
effect would be to restrict the representation of all Maori role
voters until 2032 or later. However, between
now and the boundaries review that just
concluded last year, if there was no change, there
wouldn't have been any change to the prospective boundaries for
Maori representation or general electorates, but before
2032 anyway. So how does this bill go about
impacting on that?
Well, this bill says it will delay the count.
And if
census happened quickly and there was the count happening, then
that would be one of the factors. So I haven't got all the details in
front of me, but I know that when people say, "Oh, we will delay something for this
period of time." I'm a former public servant.
Saying, oh, we'll delay it till 2028 means it won't
actually happen till 2032. The delays
implicit in the system mean that less attention will be
given to that. And of course, we've also got those other factors that are
causing disenfranchisement, like the removal of voting rights
for prisoners, which if you are denied the right of-
Stop. That doesn't have anything to do with-
No, but that's what I'm saying. You can't just take one element.
I've got a supplementary question.
All right. Please, Pete.
Because that doesn't have anything to do with this bill.
What is changing through this piece of legislation that if it
weren't brought in, would impact Maori representation
for the 2032 election? Because the next boundary review
following what would've been the next census would have also changed
for the 2032 election. So what is changing?
Well, for one thing, what is changing is the messaging from government
about who counts and who gets to vote.
Correct.
Okay. All right. Pete, thank you
yet again for presenting to the committee,
and taking the time to turn up today.
Oh, well, I'll perhaps be able to answer more questions on this next week when I
come back for the Data and Statistics Bill.
Right. Okay. Thank you. Now, I have to ask
public members, professor and a few others,
Mr. Marshall as well, could you please leave the room?
We're going to go into a private session.
But thank you for all three of you for your contributions this morning.
Thank you.
Thank you. I hope you didn't teach me stats at Massey University.
Mm-hmm.
He clearly didn't teach you.
Take no responsibility.
All right, cool.